.\" Originally written by Jan Schaumann <jschauma@netmeister.org> in January 2020.
.Dd January 12, 2020
.Dt xpipe 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm xpipe
.Nd split input and feed it into the given utility
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl \&Ic 
.Op Fl I
.Op Fl J Ar replstr
.Op Fl b Ar bytes
.Op Fl n Ar lines
.Op Fl p Ar pattern
.Op Ar utility Op Ar argument ...
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
command reads input from stdin and splits it by the
given number of bytes, lines, or if matching the given
pattern.
It then invokes the given
.Ar utility
repeatedly, feeding it the generated data chunks as
input.
.Sh OPTIONS
The following options are supported by
.Nm :
.Bl -tag -width pattern___
.It Fl I
Do not write incomplete data.
.It Fl J Ar replstr
When constructing the command to execute, replace the
occurrence of
.Ar replstr
with the integer representing the number of invocation
performed.
.It Fl b Ar num
Split input every
.Ar num
bytes.
.It Fl c
Continue even if
.Ar utility
failed.
.It Fl n Ar num
Split input every
.Ar num
lines.
.It Fl p Ar pattern
Split input by the given
.Ar pattern .
See section PATTERNS for details.
.El
.Sh DETAILS
.Nm
conceptually combines some of the functionality of the
.Xr split 1 ,
.Xr tee 1 ,
and
.Xr xargs 1
utilities.
That is, it allows for repeated execution of the given
utitity, but unlike
.Xr xargs 1 ,
.Nm
allows you to split the input and pipe it into the
utility rather than passing it as arguments.
.Pp
This allows you to process input either in byte-,
line-, or pattern-separated chunks and pipe those
chunks into the same tool without having to manually
split the input or store data in temporary files.
.Pp
Input processing is done sequentially: data is read up
until the end of the given pattern (or until the given
number of bytes or lines has been encountered); when
that condition is encountered,
.Ar utility
is invoked and the data chunk is written into a pipe
to that process;
.Nm
then waits for the process to complete, upon which it
continues to read input.
.Pp
If EOF is reached before the given condition is met,
then
.Nm
will execute
.Ar utility
and pipe into it whatever data it encountered so far.
This can be avoided by passing the
.Fl I
flag, which leads to
.Nm
discarding any partial data without invoking
.Ar utility
(again or at all).
.Sh PATTERNS
When the
.Fl p
flag is specified,
.Nm
will split input by the given pattern with each chunk
including the pattern as the last bytes.
.Pp
A pattern is, by and large, a simple, fixed string.
That is, you cannot specify regular expressions or
shell globs; all characters or bytes are matched
verbatim with the exception of the following:
.Bl -tag -width ch_
.It ^
If the '^' character is specified at the beginning of
the pattern, then it will anchor the pattern at the
beginning of the line.
.Pp
To match a literal '^' at the beginning of the line,
escape the character using '^\\^'.
For example, to match a line beginning with the string
\'^foo', you'd use the pattern '^\\^foo'.
.It $
If the '$' character is specified at the end of the
pattern (i.e., as the last character), then it will
anchor the pattern at the end of the line.
.Pp
To match a literal '$' at the end of the line,
escape the character using '\\$$'.
For example, to match a line ending with 'foo', you'd
use the pattern 'foo$'; To match a line ending with
\'foo$', you'd use 'foo\\$$'.
.It \(rsn
This will match a new line (ASCII 10).
The difference to '$' is that you can match a \\n
anywhere in your pattern, while a '$' will only match
at the end of he line.
.Pp
For example, to match a line ending in 'foo' followed
by a line beginning with 'bar', you'd use the pattern
\'foo\(rsnbar'.
.It \(rst
This will match a tab character (ASCII 9).
.Pp
For example, to match a line beginning with two tabs
followed by the string 'foo', you'd use the pattern
\'^\\t\\tfoo'.
.El
.Sh COMMAND INVOCATION
.Nm
will invoke the given
.Ar utility
with any subsequent arguments.
If the
.Fl J
flag is specified, then the given
.Ar replstr
in any of the arguments (including the utility itself)
will be replaced with the number of the invocation.
.Pp
Since I/O redirection is processed by the invoking
shell, you'd have to invoke a new shell to allow for
redirection to e.g. a per-invocation output file.
.Pp
For example, to split the input into unique files
ending in the given pattern:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
<input xpipe -J % -p pattern /bin/sh -c "cat >%.out"
.Ed
.Sh EXAMPLES
The following examples illustrate common usage of this tool.
.Pp
To count the number of words in each paragraph of 'Don
Quijote':
.Bd -literal -offset indent
curl -s https://www.gutenberg.org/cache/epub/2000/pg2000.txt | \\
        tr -d '^M' | \\
        xpipe -p '^$' wc -w
.Ed
.Pp
To extract the subjects of all certificates in a
standard PEM formatted x.509 trust bundle:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
<certs.pem xpipe -p '^-----END CERTIFICATE-----$' \\
        openssl x509 -noout -subject
.Ed
.Pp
To split a large, uncompressed log file into multiple,
compressed files, named 1.gz, 2.gz, ... n.gz:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
<logfile xpipe -n 1000 -J % /bin/sh -c "gzip >%.gz"
.Ed
.Sh EXIT STATUS
The
.Nm
command exits with a value of 0 if no error occurs.
.Pp
If the
.Fl c
flag is passed,
.Nm
will exit with an integer value representing the total
number of invocations of the
.Ar utility
that failed.
.Pp
If the
.Fl c
was not passed, then any failure in the execution of
the
.Ar utility
leads to the termination of
.Nm .
That is, if the
.Ar utility
cannot be found,
.Nm
exits with a value of 127;
if
.Ar utility
cannot be executed,
.Nm
exits with a value of 126;
if
.Ar utility
terminated because of a signal,
.Nm
exits with a value of 125.
If any other error occurs,
.Nm
exits with a value of 1.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr split 1 ,
.Xr tee 1 ,
.Xr xargs 1
.Sh HISTORY
.Nm
was originally written by
.An Jan Schaumann
.Aq jschauma@netmeister.org
in January 2020.
.Sh BUGS
Please file bugs and feature requests by emailing the author.
